WIP: Initial Xet docs (incomplete) (#1622)
huggingface/hub-docs: docs/hub/repositories-storage.md

As you can see, the pointer file size is much smaller than the remote file, allowing the repository itself to remain small. This is especially important when working with a repository using Git, as only remote files at the specific commit are transferred instead of each revision of the remote file.

The Hub’s Git LFS backend is [Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3)](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/). When Git LFS is invoked, it stores the file contents in S3 using the SHA hash to name the file for future access. This storage architecture is relatively simple and has allowed Hub to store millions of models, datasets, and spaces repositories’ files (45PB total as of this writing). 

The main limitation of LFS is its file-centric approach to deduplication. Any change to a file, irrespective of how large of small that change is, means the entire file is versioned - incurring significant overheads in file transfers as the entire file is uploaded (if committing to a repository) or downloaded (if pulling the latest version to your machine).

This leads to a worse developer experience along with a proliferation of additional storage.

> ## Xet

Reviewer: IMO you should present Xet before speaking of LFS given it's the future (LFS will be dropped at some point)

Author: OK will center this around Xet (Now) and have LFS as legacy. Right now meant to be read from LFS to Xet - instead will just start with Xet and then have a 'Legacy (LFS)' section.

Reviewer 2: @rajatarya  pushed an update that moved the positioning of this around - let me know what you think.

Reviewer 2: This is done! Thanks for the feedback.

> A Xet pointer includes all of this information (by design; refer to the section on [backwards compatibility with Git LFS](#backward-compatibility-with-lfs)) with the addition of a `Xet backed hash` field for referencing the file in Xet storage.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A Xet pointer includes all of this information by design. Refer to the section on [backwards compatibility with Git LFS](#backward-compatibility-with-lfs)) with the addition of a `Xet backed hash` field for referencing the file in Xet storage.
```

> To start using Xet Storage, you need a Xet-enabled repository and client. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To start using Xet Storage, you need a Xet-enabled repository and a Xet-aware version of the [huggingface_hub](https://huggingface.co/docs/huggingface_hub) Python library.
```

<Tip>

To make Xet the default for all your repositories, [join the waitlist](https://huggingface.co/join/xet)! You can apply for yourself or your entire organization (requires [admin permissions](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/organizations-security)). Once approved, all current repositories will be automatically migrated to Xet and future repositories will be Xet-enabled by default.

</Tip>

> To access a Xet-enabled client, add the `hf_xet` Python package when installing `huggingface_hub`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To access a Xet-aware client, add the `hf_xet` Python package when installing `huggingface_hub`:
```

- **Prioritize community access**: Xet substantially increases the efficiency and scale of large file transfers. Instead of structuring your repository to reduce its total size (or the size of individual files), organize it for collaborators and community users so they may easily navigate and retrieve the content they need.

#### Current Limitations

While Xet brings fine-grained deduplication and enhanced performance to Git-based storage, some features and platform compatibilities are still in development. As a result, keep the following constraints in mind when working with a Xet-enabled repository:

- **64-bit systems only**: The hf_xet client currently requires a 64-bit architecture; 32-bit systems are not supported.
- **Partial JavaScript library support**: The [huggingface.js](https://huggingface.co/docs/huggingface.js/index) library has limited functionality with Xet-backed repositories; additional coverage is planned in future releases.
- **Full web support currently unavailable**: Full support for chunked uploads via the Hub web interface remains under development.

> - **Git client integration (git-xet**)**: Planned but remains under development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Git client integration (git-xet)**: Planned but remains under development.
```

### Deduplication

> Xet-enabled repositories utilize [content-defined chunking (CDC)](https://huggingface.co/blog/from-files-to-chunks) to deduplicate on the level of bytes (~64KB of data, also referred to as a "chunk"). Each chunk is identified by a rolling hash that determines chunk boundaries based on the actual file contents, making it resilient to insertions or deletions anywhere in the file. When a file is uploaded to a Xet-backed repository using a Xet-enabled client, its contents are broken down into these variable-sized chunks. Only new chunks not already present in Xet storage are kept after chunking, everything else is discarded.

Reviewer 3: small nit, let's use a consistent wording 
```suggestion
Xet-enabled repositories utilize [content-defined chunking (CDC)](https://huggingface.co/blog/from-files-to-chunks) to deduplicate on the level of bytes (~64KB of data, also referred to as a "chunk"). Each chunk is identified by a rolling hash that determines chunk boundaries based on the actual file contents, making it resilient to insertions or deletions anywhere in the file. When a file is uploaded to a Xet-backed repository using a Xet-aware client, its contents are broken down into these variable-sized chunks. Only new chunks not already present in Xet storage are kept after chunking, everything else is discarded.
```

To avoid the overhead of communicating and managing at the level of chunks, new chunks are grouped together in [64MB blocks](https://huggingface.co/blog/from-chunks-to-blocks#scaling-deduplication-with-aggregation) and uploaded. Each block is stored once in a [content-addressed store (CAS)](#content-addressed-store-cas), keyed by its hash.

> The Hub's [current recommendation is to limit files to 20GB](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/storage-limits#recommendations). At a 64KB chunk size, a 20GB file has 312,500 chunks, many of which go unchanged from version to version. Git LFS is designed to notice only that a file has changed and store the entirety of that revision. By deduplicating at the level of chunks, the Xet backend enables storing only the modified content in a file (which might only be a few KB or MB) and securely deduplicates shared blocks across repositories. For the large binary files found in Model and Dataset repositories, this provides significant improvements to file transfer times.

Reviewer 3: (nit)
```suggestion
The Hub's [current recommendation](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/storage-limits#recommendations) is to limit files to 20GB. At a 64KB chunk size, a 20GB file has 312,500 chunks, many of which go unchanged from version to version. Git LFS is designed to notice only that a file has changed and store the entirety of that revision. By deduplicating at the level of chunks, the Xet backend enables storing only the modified content in a file (which might only be a few KB or MB) and securely deduplicates shared blocks across repositories. For the large binary files found in Model and Dataset repositories, this provides significant improvements to file transfer times.
```

For more details, refer to the [From Files to Chunks](https://huggingface.co/blog/from-files-to-chunks) and [From Chunks to Blocks](https://huggingface.co/blog/from-chunks-to-blocks) blog posts, or the [Git is for Data](https://www.cidrdb.org/cidr2023/papers/p43-low.pdf) paper by Low et al. that served as the launch point for XetHub prior to being acquired by Hugging Face.

### Backward Compatibility with LFS

Xet storage provides a seamless transition for existing Hub repositories. It isn't necessary to know if the Xet backend is involved at all. Xet-backed repositories continue to use the Git LFS pointer file format, with only the addition of the `Xet backed hash` field. Meaning, existing repos and newly created repos will not look any different if you do a `bare clone` of them. Each of the large files (or binary files) will continue to have a pointer file and matches the Git LFS pointer file specification.

> This symmetry allows non-Xet-enabled clients (e.g., older versions of the `huggingface_hub` that are not Xet-aware) to interact with Xet-backed repositories without concern. In fact, within a repository a mixture of Git LFS and Xet backed files are supported. As noted in the section describing the CAS APIs, the Xet backend indicates whether a file is in Git LFS or Xet storage, allowing downstream services (Git LFS or the Git LFS bridge) to provide the proper URL to S3, regardless of which storage system holds the content.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This symmetry allows non-Xet-aware clients (e.g., older versions of the `huggingface_hub` that are not Xet-aware) to interact with Xet-backed repositories without concern. In fact, within a repository a mixture of Git LFS and Xet backed files are supported. As noted in the section describing the CAS APIs, the Xet backend indicates whether a file is in Git LFS or Xet storage, allowing downstream services (Git LFS or the Git LFS bridge) to provide the proper URL to S3, regardless of which storage system holds the content.
```

# Storage

> Repositories on the Hugging Face Hub are unique to those on software development platforms. They contain files that are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Repositories on the Hugging Face Hub are different from those on software development platforms. They contain files that are:
```

> - Large - in the range of GB and above

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Large - model or dataset files are in the range of GB and above. We have a few TB-scale files!
```

Storing these files directly in a Git repository is impractical. Not only are the typical storage systems behind Git repositories unsuited for such files, but when you clone a repository, Git retrieves the entire history, including all file revisions. This can be prohibitively large for massive binaries, forcing you to download gigabytes of historic data you may never need.

Instead, on the Hub, these large files are tracked using "pointer files" and identified through a `.gitattributes` file (both discussed in more detail below), which remain in the Git repository while the actual data is stored in remote storage (like [Amazon S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/)). As a result, the repository stays small and typical Git workflows remain efficient.

Historically, Hub repositories have relied on [Git LFS](https://git-lfs.com/) for this mechanism. While Git LFS remains supported and widely used (see the [Legacy section below](#legacy-storage-git-lfs)), the Hub is introducing a modern custom storage system built specifically for AI/ML development, enabling chunk-level deduplication, smaller uploads, and faster downloads than Git LFS.

## Xet

> [In August 2024 Hugging Face acquired XetHub](https://huggingface.co/blog/xethub-joins-hf), a [seed-stage started based in Seattle](https://www.geekwire.com/2023/ex-apple-engineers-raise-7-5m-for-new-seattle-data-storage-startup/), to replace Git LFS on the Hub.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[In August 2024 Hugging Face acquired XetHub](https://huggingface.co/blog/xethub-joins-hf), a [seed-stage startup based in Seattle](https://www.geekwire.com/2023/ex-apple-engineers-raise-7-5m-for-new-seattle-data-storage-startup/), to replace Git LFS on the Hub.
```

#### Content Addressed Store (CAS)

The content addressed store (CAS) is more than just a store - it is set of services that exposes APIs for supporting uploading and downloading Xet-backed files with a key-value store (DynamoDb) mapping hashed content and metadata to its location in S3.

The primary APIs are used for:

1. Uploading blocks: Verifies the contents of the uploaded blocks, and then writes them to the appropriate S3 bucket.
2. Uploading shards: Verifies the contents of the uploaded shards, writes them to the appropriate S3 bucket, and registers the shard in CAS
3. Downloading file reconstruction information: Given the `Xet backed hash` field from a pointer file organize the manifest necessary to rebuild the file. Return the manifest to the client for direct download from S3 using presigned URLs for the relevant blocks to download.
4. Check storage location: Given the `LFS SHA256 hash` this returns if Xet or Git LFS manages the content. This is a critical part of migration & compatibility with the legacy Git LFS storage system.

> 5. Git LFS Bridge: Allows repositories using Xet storage to be accessed by legacy non-Xet-aware clients. The Bridge mimics an Git LFS server but does the work of reconstructing the requested file and returning it to the client. This allows downloading files through a single URL (so you can use tools like `curl` of the web interface of the Hub to download files).

Reviewer: maybe mention that it does not allow uploads? ie. to upload to Xet you need an actual Xet client

Reviewer 2: To simplify these docs and get the first iteration out the door, we're removing the architecture section entirely and putting it in [xet-core](https://github.com/huggingface/xet-core) instead. 

Once they're up, we can link to them from here so that contributors can get more details. 

In the meantime, I was more explicit in the `Using Xet Storage` section that you need a Xet-enabled client and repository to get the full benefits.

- **Be Specific in .gitattributes**: When defining patterns for Xet or LFS, use precise file extensions (e.g., `*.safetensors`, `*.bin`) to avoid unnecessarily routing smaller files through large-file storage.
- **Prioritize community access**: Xet substantially increases the efficiency and scale of large file transfers. Instead of structuring your repository to reduce its total size (or the size of individual files), organize it for collaborators and community users so they may easily navigate and retrieve the content they need.

#### Current Limitations

While Xet brings fine-grained deduplication and enhanced performance to Git-based storage, some features and platform compatibilities are still in development. As a result, keep the following constraints in mind when working with a Xet-enabled repository:

- **64-bit systems only**: The hf_xet client currently requires a 64-bit architecture; 32-bit systems are not supported.
- **Partial JavaScript library support**: The [huggingface.js](https://huggingface.co/docs/huggingface.js/index) library has limited functionality with Xet-backed repositories; additional coverage is planned in future releases.

> - **Full web support currently unavailable**: Full support for chunked uploads via the Hub web interface remains under development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Full web support currently unavailable**: Full support for chunked uploads via the Hub web interface remains under development.
- Git client integration (git-xet): planned but remains under development.
```

Reviewer 2: Got it in a cleanup commit! Nice catch.
